---
layout: post
title: Git
categories: [Tools]
tag: [Tool, Git, Version Control]
---

* content
{:toc}


[Git](https://git-scm.com/) is

> a free and open source distributed version control system designed to handle everything from small to very large projects with speed and efficiency.

Unlike [SVN](https://subversion.apache.org/) (subversion), Git is distributed, which means it doesn't require a centralized servers to manage the files (although servers like [GitHub](https://github.com) is convenient). This gives Git a pretty good flexibility, and makes it extremely good for open source projects.

> Suggested Chinese References
>
> 1. [廖雪峰](https://www.liaoxuefeng.com/wiki/0013739516305929606dd18361248578c67b8067c8c017b000)
> 2. <https://blog.csdn.net/qq_32452623/article/details/78276451>

Note: **Only plain texts are welcomed in a Git system, try not include too much binary files (such as `.docx`, `.paper`, `.jpg`) into the system. The necessary binaries is better to be stored elsewhere (image hosts) and only keep their pathes in the Git system. Markdown is recommended for texting in Git.**

# Installation

Git can be easily installed with `sudo apt-get install git` for most Linux systems. On the official site, a very handy program [GitBash](https://git-scm.com/download/win) is provided for Windows, which goes with most frequently used tools.

# Start with Git

## Terminologies

To understand the functionality of git, it is important to underline some terminologies.

### Repository

Repository, or repo is the core of Git. As the name indicates, it stores all the files (including history) of a project. A repo looks like a regular folder containing the files you are working on. All the dirty works are hidden behind `.git` folder in the repo, and that is where the *version control* based on.

### Workspace/Working Tree

In a repo, everything outside `.git` folder is your current workspace. The workspace can be used as if Git is not used.

Other then the workspace, the physical structure in the repo is not important. All the "places" beyond this point are not related to some real "folders" or "path" in the repo. They are just abstract objects.

### Stage/Index

Index is a place that Git holds a temporary version of your project. It is very simple to stage your current progress and roll back later if you don't want the changes after the stage. This function is good enough for local small projects.

### Commit

Once you reaches a certain point of your project, you can archive it for later reference. To do so, you can commit your current stage (files in the index) to the repo history. A commit includes current version of the project and what have been changed since last commit. The commits will form a chain according to the dependencies on each other. This forms a well established version control system.

Each commit contains the Hash as its id, the name of the author, and the time stamp. It is also recommended to append some comments to the commit, so it would be easier to understand the history. Also, commits can be signed with GPG keys, which prevents secrete illegal modifications by others.

### Head

The head is a pointer to the current commit. It is used to check out each commit in the chain and roll back the project to historical version.

### Branch

Git can store multiple versions of your projects in parallel, each version is called a *branch*. The workspace only shows one of the branches you have, and you can jump between the branches with Git. It is the branch gives Git the magic power of cooperation.

Note that everything outside the commit chain will be lost when you jump to another branch. Remember to `stash` them before checkout other branches.

## Create a Repo

A repo can be set up by `init` in any folder, which makes the folder to be a repo.

```plain
$ git init
Initialized empty Git repository in [path]
```

It is empty as no files are stored in the stage or commits.

## Temporary Version Control

To add files to the index, simply use

```plain
$ git add [file]
$
```

You can add multiple files at once, or simply stage all files by

```plain
$ git add .
$
```

You can use `git status` to check which file is modified (or untraced, or deleted) after the stage.

Similarly, you can remove a file from index (not workspace) with `git rm`

## Commit to the tree

After the files are staged, the index (not the workspace) can be committed to the tree. this can be done with

```plain
$ git commit -m "Some notes"
[master (root-commit) b2df984] Some notes
 1 file changed, 1 insertion(+)
 create mode 100644 demo.txt
```

where `b2df984` is the id of the commit. If flag `-m` is not provided, a text editor will pop out and ask for your commit message.

You can sign the commit with [GPG signature]({{ 'tools/GPG/' | prepend: site.baseurl}}) with flag `-S`

```plain
$ git commit -S -m "sign the commit"
[master 7e45c33] sign the commit
 1 file changed, 1 insertion(+), 1 deletion(-)
```

The information in the output can be find in git log

```plain
$ git log
commit 7e45c334a3f60be6fa3d31cb91305ab0bd383376 (HEAD -> master)
Author: Demo <demo@demo>
Date:   Thu Apr 25 23:12:15 2019 +0800

    sign the commit

commit b6b7e26f3b2089cec745e90e7c073a7cd6a39695
Author: Demo <demo@demo>
Date:   Thu Apr 25 23:06:15 2019 +0800

    Another Commit
```

## Show the difference

One of the powerful function of Git is `diff`. It can show the difference between any two files. This is especially useful to checkout what is changed between different commits and the index and current workspace.

```plain
$ git diff
diff --git a/demo.txt b/demo.txt
index 0f22871..e019be0 100644
--- a/demo.txt
+++ b/demo.txt
@@ -1 +1 @@
-extra
+second
```

`a` and `b` are two flags used to indicate two files. As shown in the output, `-` indicates what is deleted from `a`, and `+` indicates what is add on `b`. The number between `@@` is the line number of the change, and the following text is the explicit difference between the files. Some tools, such as [GitHub Desktop](https://desktop.github.com/) may help reading this message and provides more human friendly interface.

This powerful tool can only be used on plain texts, and that is why binary files are not recommended for Git system.

The detailed usage of `diff` see cheat sheet at the end of the page.

## Roll Back

As a version control system, Git provides several methods to roll back to old versions.

This can be done with `reset` commend. To reset to a commit, you need to find out its id, which can be found in the log. If no commits are specified, the default value is `HEAD`. The commit can also be indicated with `HEAD^^^`, where each `^` indicates the parent commit from previous one, and `HEAD` is the current commit.

Since Git is a two step version control system, you need to specify where to put the original files. To simplify the condition, the effect of different flags are shown in cheat sheet.

Note that `reset` only reset the position of `HEAD`. The commits are not deleted after `reset`. You can find all command histories with

```plain
$ git reflog
e475afc HEAD@{1}: reset: moving to HEAD^
1094adb (HEAD -> master) HEAD@{2}: commit: sign the commit
e475afc HEAD@{3}: commit: Another commit
eaadf4e HEAD@{4}: commit (initial): Some notes
```

which provides all commit ids, including those reset ones, e.g. `1094adb` here.

## Change the Workspace

Git can maintain multiple branches in parallel. This makes sure people in a team can work independently on different parts of the project and assemble the whole program later. That is, each member can create their own branch and merge the branches to a main branch, usually called `master`, at some point. You can download the branches from others and checkout their progress.

To jump between different branches, you need commend `checkout`

```plain
$ git checkout master
Switched to branch 'master'
M       demo.txt
```

`M` here indicates this file is modified by checkout. With flag `-b`, a new branch will be created if it doesn't exist. This is equivalent to `git branch [branch]` then `git checkout [branch]`. (flag `-B` works similarly, but it is dangerous as it will override the branch if it exists).

`checkout` can also be used to drawback files from previous commits

```plain
$ git checkout demo.txt
Updated 1 path from the index
```

If no commit is specified, the default is the index. Different from `reset`, `checkout` doesn't move the Head (unless you are checking another branch, which moves the head to that branch).

## Remote Repo

As a distributed system, the Git repo can be distributed to different devices and forms a network. However, there is no such a thing like 'central server', and each server is equally important.

To connect to a Git server, you need to sent your ssh public key to the server. All major servers like GitHub, GitLab, Gitee provide very simple instructions to do that. *Major servers may provides https access to the repos as well, which might be simpler for beginners, but you may need to enter passphrases every time pushing your branches.*.

Then the information you need is the address of the remote repo, which looks like `git@github.com:UserName/Demo.git`.

You can connect the remote repo to your local repo with

```plain
$ git remote add origin git@github.com:UserName/Demo.git master
$
```

`origin` is the default name for remote repos. 

After set up the remote repo, you can sync between remote and local repos. To push the local repo to remote, simply use the alias `origin` defined above

```plain
$ git push -u origin master
Counting objects: 20, done.
Delta compression using up to 4 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (15/15), done.
Writing objects: 100% (20/20), 1.64 KiB | 560.00 KiB/s, done.
Total 20 (delta 5), reused 0 (delta 0)
remote: Resolving deltas: 100% (5/5), done.
To git@github.com:UserName/Demo.git
 * [new branch]      master -> master
Branch 'master' set up to track remote branch 'master' from 'origin'.
```

You need to specify the branch `master` to be pushed. The flag `-u` is used to setup links between local and remote `master` branches, as indicated in the last line of output.

## Merge

In real projects, usually new features are developed in some independent new branches, e.g. `dev`. Once the feature is finished, we want to merge it to master branch. This can be done with `merge` on `master` branch. If there are no conflicts between `dev` and `master`, that is, no lines are changed on both branches after their bifurcation, you it should go with `Fast-forward` mode:

```plain
$ git merge dev
Updating d46f35e..b17d20e
Fast-forward
 demo.txt | 1 +
 1 file changed, 1 insertion(+)
```

Otherwise, if there are conflicts, you will be notified and Git will enter `merging` mode:

```plain
$ git merge dev
Auto-merging demo.txt
CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in demo.txt
Automatic merge failed; fix conflicts and then commit the result.
```

In this mode `git status` will show you where the conflicts are. You can abort the merge can roll back to normal mode with `git merge --abort`, or edit the files listed and resolve the conflicts.

In `merging` mode, you will find the conflicted lines as

```plain
 <<<<<<< HEAD
This is master branch.
=======
This is develop branch.
 >>>>>>> dev
```

Where between `<<<<<<< HEAD` and `=======` is the lines in HEAD, and below it are the lines in `dev` branch. Fix these blocks and save the files. Once you are done, you can `add` the files to index and `commit` the merge. The bifurcation and merges of branches will form loops in the git log. You can find the loops in a visualized way with `git log --graph`.

```plain
$ git log --graph --pretty=oneline --abbrev-commit
*   2f128c4 conflict solved
|\  
| * 1c85f25 a conflict commit
| * dd37a3b commit in dev
* | a22211f second commit
|/  
* 1c7e0d8 first commit
```

However, it is relatively hard to read and fix files in commend line. Git has a builtin GUI, which can be opened with `git gui`. It makes reading logs and status easier. To merge and see differences, a gui tool is recommended. Personally, I prefer[ VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/), as it list the differences in a more human friendly way, and it is smarter then native git. Vanilla VSCode is good enough for light duties. To configure the tools, simply paste the code below to you config files:

```plain
[merge]
	tool = vscode
[mergetool "vscode"]
	cmd = "code --wait $MERGED"
[diff]
	tool = vscode
[difftool "vscode"]
	cmd = "code --wait --diff $LOCAL $REMOTE"
```


# Other Feathers

Git also provides other handy tools for version control

## Stash

Stash provides you a place to temporarily save your workspace. If you need to shift to another branch in emergency, e.g. to fix a serious bug on `master` branch, everything not in index will be lost. In case you don't want to override the index, you can use `stash`.

You can use `git stash list` to see what is there in stash, and use `git stash pop` to recover the latest stash. If you need to recover old stashes, you need to specify its hash, which is shown in the `stash list`.

## Tag

It is annoying to memorize the commit ids, and thus you may need to read through the commit history every time and carefully pick out the one you need in order to checkout an old version. For some important milestone commits, you can give them a `tag`, e.g. `v0.1`.

You can use `git tag` to list all the tags in the branch, and use `git show [tag]` to check its commit information.

To add a tag, you can use

```plain
$ git tag -a v0.1 -m "Some notes"
$
```

to add tag to current commit. Flag `-a` indicates you want to include annotation, including your information and the time stamp. Flag `-m` put a note into the flag. You can also use `-s` instead of `-a` to sign the annotation with GPG keys. It is also possible to tag an elder commit by specify its id, for example `$ git tag -a v0.1 ffffff`

The flags are not required and you can simply use a light tag as an alias to the commit.

Tags will not be pushed to remote automatically. You can push them to remote with flag `--tag`.

# Cheat Sheet

Configuration

Use `git config -e` to edit configuration files, where `-e` is a shorthand for `--edit`.

The default flag is `--local` configuration, which is for current repo. `--global` flag is for current user, and `--system` is for the system.

---

`diff`, default target is index

| Command | Apply to |
| :-----: | :------: |
| `diff`  | Workspace vs. Index |
| `diff head` | Workspace vs. HEAD |
| `diff --cached` | Index vs. HEAD |

---

`reset`, default target is `HEAD`

| Command | Apply to |
| :-----: | :------: |
| `reset --soft`  | HEAD -> HEAD |
| `reset --mixed` | HEAD -> Index |
| `reset --hard` | HEAD -> Index -> Workspace |

---

`checkout`, default target is `HEAD`

| Command | Apply to |
| :-----: | :------: |
| `checkout` | - |
| `checkout [branch]` | `[branch].HEAD` -> Workspace |
| `checkout [commit]` | `[commit]` -> Workspace |